For Mount A r  (A r  Da  ), see Mount Ararat.;
For the capital of the province, see A r .;


A r  (Armenian:        ; Kurdish: Agir\EE ) is a province on the eastern borders of Turkey, bordering Iran to the east, Kars to the North, Erzurum to the Northeast, Mu  and Bitlis to the Southeast, Van to the south, and I d r to the northeast. Area 11,376 km\B2. Population 437,093 (1990). 

The provincial capital is A r , situated on a 1,650 m. high plateau.

Etymology.
See Mount Ararat (A r  Da  ).

In the Ottoman Empire era the area was called  orbulak, and Karakilise (black church) which was then mutated to Karak\F6se (the black man with no moustache!!!) towards the end of the Ottoman period. 

Districts.
A r  province is divided into 8 districts (capital district in bold):
A r ;
Diyadin;
Do ubeyaz t;
Ele kirt;
Hamur;
Patnos;
Ta l \E7ay;
Tutak;


Geography.
A r  is named after the nearby majestic Mount Ararat, a 5,165 m. high stratovolcano, the highest mountain in Turkey. It can be climbed from here and can be seen from parts of Armenia, Iran, Georgia, and Azerbaijan. The nearest town to the mountain is Do ubeyaz t.

46% of the province is mountain, 29% is plain, 18% is plateau, and 7% high meadow. As well as Ararat there are many other peaks over 3,000m, including Alada lar and Tend\FCrek. The plains are fertile, being covered in volcanic deposits, and are used for growing grains and grazing. Various tributaries of the Murat River (which later feeds the Euphrates) flow through the area and water these plains. The high meadows are used for grazing. 

The weather here is very, very cold (temperatures as low as -45C in winter) and the mountainsides are mainly bare. There are a number of important passes and routes through the mountains. 

History.
The plateau of A r  was historically controlled by the Kingdom of Urartu until its transition to the Orontid Dynasty of the Kingdom of Armenia.  The area was coveted by many foreign invaders as a gateway between east and west.  It was conquered numerous times by Assyrians, Greeks, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs, Mongols, Persians, and finally by the Seljuq and Ottoman Turks.

The first Turkish presence in the region was the brief occupation of the Do ubeyaz t area by the Saka in 680. The first Muslims in the area were the Abbasids in 872. The Turkish hordes began to pass through in huge numbers following the defeat of the Byzantine armies at Malazgirt in 1071, sometimes pursued by Mongols. The land was brought into the Ottoman Empire by Sultan Selim II following the Battle of Chaldiran.

Under Ottoman rule, the area that is now the A r  Province mostly consisted of indigenous Armenians and Kurds.  The former lived fairly well until the Hamidian massacres and the Armenian Genocide.  Those Armenians who managed to escape liquidation fled north to Russian Armenia.

Since the establishment of the modern Turkish Republic, the area became unstable again with numerous Kurdish uprisings (one even leading to the temporary establishment of a Kurdish state, the Republic of Ararat).

Recent events.
On August 19, 2006, a Turkish-Iranian natural gas pipeline exploded in the province.  Turkish authorities suspect separatist PKK was behind the incident. 

A r  today.
People live by grazing animals and A r  also attracts tourists to the mountain, for climbing and trekking in summers, and skiing in winters; and also some are keen to see places of interest such as: 
Ishak Pasha Palace and the second-largest meteor crater in the world, in Do ubeyaz t;
Aznavur Tepe in Patnos;
The tomb of Ahmedi Hani in Diyadin.




 External links .

 the provincial governorate;
  A r  Weather Forecast Information;















ENDOFARTICLE.
