

Bobby's World is a children's animated television series, which ran from 1990 to 1998, on FOX. It was about the daily life of Bobby Generic (pronounced JEN-er-ick, unlike the adjective that is pronounced ji-NER-ick) and his very overactive imagination on how he sees the world.  This show was created by Howie Mandel (now the host of NBC's Deal or No Deal), who was also the voice of four-year-old Bobby (as well as Bobby's father, who looks just like a cartoon version of Howie himself), and was produced by Film Roman for Fox Television Studios and Fox Kids Network.  In a recent online interview, Mandel expressed his desire for a possible re-launch of the series. On September 28, 2006, Mandel mentioned on The Ellen DeGeneres Show that the series will be returning in 2007, in addition to doing his job hosting Deal or No Deal. He further mentioned that the series was returning on The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson. While he did not mention it during his November 15, 2006 appearance on Late Night with Conan O'Brian he wore a shirt that read "Generic Rules", a possible reference to Bobby's last name.

History.

The character of "Bobby" can likely be traced back to Mandel's days as a stand up comedian in Canada and later the United States. Mandel would commonly go into character with the same voice as Bobby, often conversing with an unseen "parent". .

Show Format.

Episodes often consist of a short live action segment either before or after the main story (and sometimes both before and after). The segment would include Mandel describing some aspect of the story and often relating it back to his personal childhood.
Sometimes during these segments, the character of Bobby would appear in animated form and converse with Mandel. Other times, a live action child would appear and exchange words with Mandel. Endings of the show also featured a form of Mandel breaking the proverbial Fourth wall by talking to the audience about the episode

Characters.
Bobby Generic, 4-year old protagonist;
Howard Generic, Bobby's father (modeled upon and also voiced by Howie Mandel);
Martha Generic, Bobby's mother, who speaks with a heavy Minnesota accent and often punctuates her speech with odd phrases like "Fer cryin' in the mud" and "don't'cha know".
Kelly Generic, Bobby's 14-year-old sister;
Derek Generic, Bobby's 10-year-old brother;
The Generic Twins, Bobby's infant brothers;
Aunt Ruth, Bobby's aunt and Martha's sister (voice of Edie McClurg);
Uncle Ted, Bobby's uncle and Martha's brother (voice of Tino Insana);
Roger, the Generic family dog;
Jackie, Bobby's next door neighbor/classmate with the floor-length pigtails who always kisses him;

Episodes.
80 episodes were produced:

Season 1.
 The Visit to Aunt Ruth's;
 Uncle Ted's Excellent Adventure (on DVD "Classic Scratch 'N Sniff Episodes");
 Adventures in Bobby Sitting;
 The Best One of the Mall;
 My Dad Can Fix Anything;
 Ultimate Seduction;
 The Big Sweep;
 The Night of the Living Pumpkin;
 Beach Blanket Bobby;
 The Revenge of Dr. Noo;
 In Search of the Ring Bear;
 See America Last;
 Bobby's Big Broadcast;

Season 2.
 Three Kids and a Baby;
 Suspects, Lies & Videotape (on DVD "The Signature Episodes");
 Race Riot;
 Nightmare on Bobby's Street;
 Caution: Bobby at Work;
 Total Recess;
 Chariots of Bobby;
 Bobby's Birthday Bash;

Season 3.
 Bobby's Tooth or Dare (on DVD "Classic Scratch 'N Sniff Episodes");
 Bobby's Big Move (on DVD "The Signature Episodes");
 Bad News Bears (a.k.a. I Killed Mommy);
 Swim by Me (on DVD "Classic Scratch 'N Sniff Episodes");
 The Play's the Thing;
 Fish Tales (on DVD "Classic Scratch 'N Sniff Episodes");
 The Unheard Music;
 Misery Loves Company;
 Bobby Phone Home;
 Baby Brother Blues;
 Bobby's Girl;
 III Effects;
 I Want My Mommy;

Season 4.
 The Hero (on DVD "The Signature Episodes");
 Uncle Ted's New Friend;
 The World Accordion to Bobby;
 Bobby Takes the Knot;
 Jets, Choo-Choos, and Cars (on DVD "Classic Scratch 'N Sniff Episodes");
 Karate Bobby;
 A Day with Dad;
 Psycho Bobby;
 The Smell of a Tattletale;
 Blue Monday;
 One Clump or Two;
 Bobby's Big Dream;
 Bobby, the Musical (on DVD "The Signature Episodes");

Season 5.
 Rebel Without a Clue;
 Geriatric Park;
 Herry Takes a Powder;
 Bobby's Big Boo-Boo;
 Mom on Wheels;
 Weekend at Teddie's;
 Generics Under Construction;
 Mrs. Noogiefire (on DVD "The Signature Episodes");
 Bobby Sticker;
 No Sale;
 Who You Gonna Call?
 Starring Bobby (a.k.a. The Day I Became Robert);
 The Truth About Aunt Ruth;

Season 6.
 Bobby On-Line;
 Bobby the Genius;
 Bobby's World: Kakyoin's Hierophant Barrier;
 Bobby's Last Stand;
 Miracle on 34th St. & Rural Route #1;
 Just Plain Sleepless;
 Bobby, Lord of the Slopes;
 Helter-Skelter;
 Time After Time;
 Independence Bobby;
 Bobby the Candy Date;

Season 7.
 Bad Manners Bobby;
 Roger's Ransom;
 Cooties;
 Promises, Promises;
 Generics and Indians;
 It's A Generic Life;
 The Real Folk Blues;
 The Monster that Shouted I;
 The Sickness Unto Death, And...
 The End of Bobby's World;

Trivia.
 The theme song for Bobby's World was composed by John Tesh, along with Michael Hanna.
 The voice of Martha Generic (as performed by Gail Matthius) was based on the voice of Roweena, a character that Matthius performed on Saturday Night Live.
 In the US, during the show's final season on-air, the show was open-captioned for the hearing-impaired; this was done by using the show's closed-captions in a way that all viewers could see them. This is despite the fact that most network programming by this time were closed-captioned, and most televisions made after 1993 had closed-captioning capabilities.

 DVD Releases .
 Classic Scratch 'n' Sniff Episodes and The Signature Episodes are both released on DVD in North America by Anchor Bay Entertainment.

Credits.
Based on a character created by: Howie Mandel;
Executive Producers: Phil Roman, Margaret Loesch, Howie Mandel;
Producer: Gary Conrad;
Supervising Producer: Mitch Schauer;
Developers & Creative Consultants: Jim Staahl, Jim Fisher;
Story Editor: Diane Dixon;
Co Producers: Jim Staahl, Jim Fisher, Diane Dixon;
Directors: Ron Myrick, Robert Treat, Bernie Wolf, Jeff Hall, John Peters;
Supervising Directors: John Conning, Bob Curtis;
Production Supervisors: Jason Bikowski, Jeff Curtis;
Assistant Background Designer: Charles Payne;
Storyboard: Stark Howell, Adam Dykstra, Brian Hogan, Bob Boyle, Jim Schumann;
Art Director: Brad Landreth;
Lip Sync Editors: Kent Holaday, Mario Williams, Jack White, Christina ;
Additional Backgrounds: Neil Affleck, James Beihold, Fred Crippen, Michael Diederich, David McBride, Aaron Crippen;
Background Layout Checker: Lorraine Marue;
Color Key: Stephen Lee, Libby Reed;
Executives in Charge of Production: Bill Schultz, Kenneth T. Ito;
Studio Production Manager: Anne Luiting;
Executive in Charge of Post Production: Barney Gilmore;
Voice Recording: Screen Music Studios;
Voice Direction: Ginny McSwain;
Sound Editors: Charles Rychwalski, Brian F. Mars, Michael Bradley, Bill Kean;
Foley Artist: Joseph T. Sabella;
Re-Recording Mixer: Timothy Borquez;
Music Supervisor: Dean Olawski;
Music Editors: Roy Braverman, William Griggs, Alex Wilkinson;
Theme Music by: John Tesh, Michael Hanna;
Music by: John Tesh, Mark Koval;
Overseas Supervisors: Glenn Kirkpatrick, Russell Crispin;
Production Facilities: Cuckoo's Nest Studios, Wang Film Production Co. Ltd;
A Film Roman Production for Fox Kids;
Copyright:   & \A91990-1997 Fox Children's Network, Inc. Bobby's World is a registered trademark of Alevy Productions, Inc.

External links.
 Bobby's World Site at HowieMandel.com;
 ;
 Bobby's World at TV.com;
 Toon Tracker Audio File - The Bobby's World Theme;
 Bobby's World at Crown Combo;









ENDOFARTICLE.
