"Election Night Special" is a Monty Python sketch parodying the coverage of United Kingdom general elections, specifically the 1970 general election on the BBC by including hectic (and downright silly) actions by the media and a range of ridiculous candidates. 

Throughout the sketch, the Linkman (John Cleese) excitedly reports the results of the elections in Leicester, Luton, Harpenden, and other municipalities. Usually the two major parties are the Sensible Party and the Silly Party, though occasional third-party candidates (Slightly Silly, Very Silly) make their appearance. The Blackadder episode Dish and Dishonesty features an election scene which clearly owes a debt to this sketch.

This sketch was featured in Episode 19 of the Monty Python's Flying Circus TV series, which aired November 3, 1970. A somewhat different version of the sketch (leading into The Lumberjack Song) was also featured on the Monty Python Live at the Theatre Royal Drury Lane album. 

The candidates and their numbers.

Leicester: 

Arthur J. Smith (SENSIBLE) - 30,612;
Jethro Q. Walrustitty (SILLY) - 32,108;

Luton: 

Alan Jones (SENSIBLE) - 9,112;
Tarquin Fin-tim-lin-bin-whin-bim-lim-bus-stop-F'tang-F'tang-Ol\E9-Biscuitbarrel (SILLY) - 12,441;
Kevin Phillips-Bong (SLIGHTLY SILLY) - 0;

Harpenden:

Mr Elsie Zzzzzzzzzzzzzzz (SILLY) - 26,317;
James Walker (SENSIBLE) - 26,318;
Malcolm Peter Brian Telescope Adrian Umbrella Stand Jasper Wednesday (pops mouth twice) Stoatgobbler John Raw Vegetable (sound effect of horse whinnying) Arthur Norman Michael (blows squeaker) Featherstone Smith (blows whistle) Northgot Edwards Harris (fires pistol, which goes 'whoop') Mason (chuff-chuff-chuff) Frampton Jones Fruitbat Gilbert (sings) 'We'll keep a welcome in the' (three shots, stops singing) Williams If I Could Walk That Way Jenkin (squeaker) Tiger-draws Pratt Thompson (sings) 'Raindrops Keep Falling On My Head' Darcy Carter (horn) Pussycat 'Don't Sleep In The Subway' Barton Mainwaring (hoot, 'whoop') Smith (VERY SILLY) - 2;

Notes.
 Among other changes: The live version at Drury Lane gave a much shorter name to the Very Silly candidate in Harpenden and changed some of the first syllables of Tarquin's surname, making it Fin-tim-lim-bim-(brief pause)lim-bim-bim-bim-bim. Sensible Candidate James Walker became Jeannette Walker, and Silly Candidate Jethro Q. Walrustitty was referred to as Jethro Q. Bunn Whackett Buzzard Stubble and Boot Walrustitty ("Bun, Whacket, Buzzard, Stubble and Boot" was an early name considered for what became "Monty Python."). Elsie Zzzzzzzzzzzz was also referred to as Mrs rather than Mr.
The changed name for the aformentioned Very Silly candidate was "Malcolm Peter Brian Telescope Adrian Blackpool Rock Stoatgobbler John Raw Vegetable Brrroooo Norman Michael (rings bell) (blows whistle) Edward (sounds car horn) (does train impersonation) (sounds buzzer) Thomas Moo... (sings) "We'll keep a welcome in the..." (fires gun) William (sound of whoopee whistle) "Raindrops keep falling on my" (weird noise) "Don't sleep in the subway" (cuckoo cuckoo) Naaoooo... Smith.";
Tarquin Fin-tim-lin-bin-whin-bim-lim-bus-stop-F'tang-F'tang-Ol\E9-Biscuitbarrel later made another appearance in the third season's Spot the Looney sketch.


See also.
Official Monster Raving Loony Party;

External link.
"Election Night Special" script;


ENDOFARTICLE.
