


Huang Zhong (148   220) was a leading military general of the Kingdom of Shu during the late Eastern Han Dynasty and Three Kingdoms period in ancient China. He was most noted for his victory in the Battle of Mount Dingjun, in which his force routed that of Xiahou Yuan, who was slain in the battle. For his merits, Huang Zhong was ranked among the five leading generals of Shu, later popularized as the Five Tiger Generals.

Huang Zhong had always been portrayed in popular literature and arts as an elderly general with youthful vigor and constitution. Even now, the spirit to strive for excellence despite old age is often attributed to him. However, little was documented about him in historical records and it is impossible to tell how old he was when he was named one of the Five Tiger Generals.

Life.

Born in Nanyang Commandery (present day Nanyang, Henan), Huang Zhong initially served a military post under Liu Biao, governor of Jingzhou (  ). After Liu Biao's death in 208, the powerful warlord Cao Cao conquered Jingzhou and Huang Zhong continued his service under this new lord of the land, specifically in Changsha under the city governor Han Xuan (  ).

Following Cao Cao's defeat at the Battle of Red Cliffs in the same year, Liu Bei was gradually taking over the various commanderies in southern Jingzhou, including Changsha. Huang Zhong then began his service under Liu Bei. He performed extremely well in Liu Bei's campaign to gain Yizhou (  ) from 212 to 214, his bravery in battles unmatched by any. After Yizhou was taken, Huang Zhong was promoted to General who Campaigns against Rebels (    ).

In 217, Liu Bei led a force upon Hanzhong, which was under the control of Cao Cao. His force met with resistance led by Xiahou Yuan at Yangping Pass (   ). The confrontation dragged on for more than a year until one night, Liu Bei set fire to the barbed fence around Xiahou Yuan's camp at the foot of Mount Dingjun (   ). Alarmed by the attack, Xiahou Yuan sent Zhang He to defend the eastern corner of the camp, while he guarded the south. Liu Bei's main force pressed against Zhang He, outmatching the latter. Xiahou Yuan had to dispatch a fraction of his own troops to Zhang He's rescue.

Accompanied by thundering drums, the division led by Huang Zhong then descended upon Xiahou Yuan's dwindling force. The battle became a rout and Xiahou Yuan himself was killed in battle. The victory at Mount Dingjun was a major stepping stone to the later conquest of Hanzhong.

In 219, Liu Bei proclaimed himself King of Hanzhong and effectively the first emperor of the Kingdom of Shu. He then promoted Huang Zhong to General of the Rear (   ), placing the latter on the same level as four other veteran generals: Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, Ma Chao and Zhao Yun. However, Huang Zhong died in the next year, to an unspecified cause. He was given the posthumous title of Marquis Gang, literally meaning the unyielding marquis.

Huang Zhong in Romance of the Three Kingdoms.

The Romance of the Three Kingdoms, a historical novel by Luo Guanzhong, was a romanticization of the events that occurred before and during the Three Kingdoms period. In the novel, Huang Zhong was portrayed as an aged but extremely talented warrior, excelling especially in archery. He was also credited with the slaying of Xiahou Yuan, a prominent general of the Kingdom of Wei, in the Battle of Mount Dingjun, though in reality the latter was most probably killed in the rush of enemy soldiers.

Battle of Mount Dingjun.


In Chapter 71, Xiahou Yuan stationed his troops on Mount Dingjun and effectively resisted the advance of Huang Zhong. Under the council of advisor Fa Zheng, Huang Zhong occupied Mount Tiandang (   ), a taller peak that lied to the west of Mount Dingjun. From this new vantage point Huang Zhong had an excellent view of Xiahou Yuan's troop movements.

Xiahou Yuan could not tolerate his enemy spying on him and insisted on attacking Mount Tiandang. Setting out his troops to surround Mount Tiandang, Xiahou Yuan rode forth and challenged his enemy to battle. However, Huang Zhong kept his troops back and refused to engage.

In the afternoon, Fa Zheng saw from his lookout post near the peak that Xiahou Yuan's troops had grown tired and dispirited. He then hoisted a red flag, signalling Huang Zhong to attack. Amid deafening drums and war horns, the Shu troops rushed downhill with Huang Zhong galloping in the forefront. Before he could react, Xiahou Yuan was cleft in two below his shoulders by Huang Zhong. With their commander dead, the Wei soldiers were easily defeated and Mount Dingjun was felled.

Battle outside Luocheng.
Prior to the Battle of Mount Dingjun, before Liu Bei had even gained Yizhou (  ), Luo Guanzhong created a fictional battle in which Huang Zhong competed with his colleague Wei Yan for credits. In Chapter 62, Liu Bei's main force was approaching Luocheng (  ), a strategic city which would allow further advances on Chengdu, capital of Yizhou.

The enemy had established two camps sixty li outside the city, one under Ling Bao (  ) and the other under Deng Xian (  ). Huang Zhong had volunteered to lead a vanguard force to vanquish both camps, which Liu Bei approved, when Wei Yan voiced his doubts over the aged Huang Zhong's physical ability. This infuriated Huang Zhong, who challenged Wei Yan to a duel. To appease both, Liu Bei then ordered Huang Zhong to attack Ling Bao and Wei Yan to strike Deng Xian.

Wanting all credits for himself, Wei Yan set out his troops early next morning and headed for Ling Bao's camp instead. However, Ling Bao was ready for the attack and used a flanking tactic on the enemy. Wei Yan's troops, exhausted after a long march, were overpowered and began to retreat. Wei Yan's horse stumbled, throwing its rider off. A force led by Deng Xian had by then arrived, and its commander came straight for Wei Yan with his spear held forth.

Just then, an arrow knocked Deng Xian off in mid-gallop. So it was that Huang Zhong had come to the rescue. Having slain the fallen Deng Xian, Huang Zhong then went for Ling Bao, brandishing his sword. Ling Bao was no match for his ferocious foe and had to retreat. However, his camp was already taken over by Liu Bei's main force. In his frantic attempt to find an escape, Ling Bao was ambushed and captured by Wei Yan, who had regrouped his force in a bid to redeem himself. For the victory, Huang Zhong was heavily rewarded while Wei Yan was pardoned for his disobedience.

Death.
The events leading up to Huang Zhong's death in Chapter 83 were probably fictitious as well. Luo Guangzhong wrote that in 222, Huang Zhong followed Liu Bei on a campaign against the Kingdom of Wu. One day, hearing that Liu Bei commented on aged and incapable generals, Huang Zhong mounted his horse and rode straight to the forward camp.

Just at this time, an enemy vanguard force had arrived. Huang Zhong insisted on meeting the enemies. Holding his sword ready, the old general challenged for a duel with the enemy commander Pan Zhang (  ). Pan Zhang sent out his aide Shi Ji (  ), who was slain by Huang Zhong within three bouts.

Brandishing the late Guan Yu's Green Dragon Crescent Blade, Pan Zhang then rode forward to meet Huang Zhong. Neither could establish a clear advantage but Huang Zhong was fighting with all his might. Not expecting to win the battle, Pan Zhang then retreated.

The next day, Pan Zhang rode out to issue challenge for another duel, which Huang Zhong eagerly took up. Within bouts, however, Pan Zhang turned to escape. Huang Zhong gave pursuit without hesitation. It was in fact a plot by the enemy, who had ambushed in wait for Huang Zhong. Running right into the trap, Huang Zhong was struck beneath the collar bone by an arrow fired by Ma Zhong (  ) and almost fell off his horse.

Fortunately, a friendly force led by Guan Xing and Zhang Bao (  ) came to the rescue and brought back Huang Zhong. Liu Bei came personally to the forward camp to see the injured general, but Huang Zhong was too old and weak to survive the arrow wound. He died the same night in camp, at the age of seventy-five.

Modern references.

Huang Zhong is a playable character in the Koei video game series Dynasty Warriors.  Huang is depicted as a wise and honourable elderly man whom younger officers, such as Zhao Yun, respect and look to for guidance. always eager to prove to friend and foe alike that he is still a very capable officer and combatant.  His weapon of choice is a large and elaborate saber he calls the "Oracle Sword," although his prowess with a bow features largely into his cinematic sequences and conversations.

The Battle of Mt. Ding Jun is Huang's shining moment.  Leading his unit into battle against the defending Cao Wei army, Huang personally slays Xiahou Yuan in almost every release in which he appears.  He will usually compliment Xiahou's skill, but will refuse to spare his life, due to the level of arrogance and disdain with which he treats his opposition.  Although his relationship with other officers is not as strong as other characters, he is shown to have ties to Wei Yan, as the two served together before entering Liu Bei's service. He is also shown to have a good relationship with Yan Yan, who constantly serves as Huang's second-in-command. Apart from his long, grey beard, Huang is usually depicted as appearing youthful for his age.  He generally wears light armour consisting  of steel and leather over cloth, commonly worn by cavalry archers and other frontline fighters who rely on agility and swift movement during battle.  This is sometimes accompanied by flowing, green and gold robes to add a unique style to his appearance.

References.
;
;
;

See also.
Three Kingdoms;
Personages of the Three Kingdoms;
Chronicles of the Three Kingdoms;
Romance of the Three Kingdoms;














ENDOFARTICLE.
