History.
Isoko is the name of one of the ethnic groups living in the Niger Delta area of Nigeria. The people fondly call themselves the "Isoko nation" or the "Isoko people". The Isoko area is located in the present Delta State of Nigeria. It used to be a part of the defunct "Mid-West Region" and then was part of "Bendel State", before Bendel State was split to form two new states: "Edo" and "Delta" states. The language spoken by the Isoko people is "Isoko". It is linguistically similar to that spoken by the neighboring Urhobo people. While some people believed that the Isoko people  originated from the Benin peoples, this is not true. Professor Obaro Ikime states "If there is any aspect of the history of the various peoples of Nigeria about which no one can speak with any exactitude, it is that which deals with the origins of our peoples" . The belief that most of the Isoko groups are of Benin origin were views held and expressed in the 1960s and 1970s. These views were "decidedly simplistic and were based on British Intelligence Reports of the 1930s" and Ikime's field work of 1961-1963.

Politics and Government.
With the creation of the present Delta State in Nigeria, 2 local government units were created in the Isoko. These are:
Isoko North  - The Isoko North Local Government Area has its headquarters at Ozoro;
Isoko South - The Isoko South Local Government Area has its headquarters at Oleh;

Major Isoko towns.
	Ada;
	Aradhe;
	Aviara;
	Bethel;
	Ellu;
	Emede;
	Emevor;
	Enhwe;
	Erowa;
	Ibrede;
	Idheze;
	Igbide;
	Igbuku;
	Iluelogbo;
	Irri;
	Ivori;
	Ivrogbo;
	Iyede;
	Ofagbe;
	Okpe;
	Oleh;
	Olomoro;
       Onogboko;
	Orie;
	Otor-Ohwe;
	Ovrode;
	Owhe;
	Oyede;
	Ozoro;
	Umeh;
	Uro;
	Utue;
	Uzere;

Economy.
The main economic activity is food crop farming. And the staple food crops include cassava and yams. There is also the widespread production of palm oil and palm kernels. Limited amount of hunting and fishing is also done. Women form a large proportion of the farming population. They also engage in trade of food crops for cash to meet other basic household needs. On market days, it is common to see Isoko women peddling their assorted goods around neighboring villages.

Cassava is the source of most of the foods consumed by the Isoko people. "Garri", starch meal ("Ozi"), "Egu" are cassava derivatives.

Food crop production has been declining rapidly recently. This has been largely attributed to soil damage resulting from frequent crude oil spills from pipelines belonging to some of the major oil producing companies (including Shell Petroleum Development Company (SPDC), whose pipeline network transverse the landscape). This has led to large-scale frustrations with Shell Petroleum Development Company, and has resulted in skirmishes and, recently, kidnappings for ransom in some neighboring communities.

Demographics.
There is no definitive population census figure on the size of the Isoko people and, indeed, most of Nigeria. The various Nigerian census figures have been controversial and are deemed unsupportable.

Transport.
Popular mode of transport is the motorcycle and bicycle. Inter-city travel is by bus or car.


Education.
Several secondary schools and post-secondary schools exist in the region. The Isoko people know the value of education and encourage their young to attend school. The Isoko people have been known to be very passionate about location of education infrastructure in their communities, believing it is a mark of progress.  	 
 
Early emphasis was on teacher-training schools and this led to a glut of teachers in the community. This is rapidly changing as opportunities offered by other professions are recognized.

Major post-primary educational institutions in the region include Notre Dame College, Ozoro; James Welch Grammar School, Emevor; Saint Joseph's Teacher's College, Ozoro; Saint Michael's College Oleh; Bribina Grammar School, Ozoro, and several more. Post-secondary schools include a campus of the Delta State University at Oleh and a Polytechnic at Ozoro.

Society and Culture.
The language of the Isoko people is "Isoko"

The Isoko people are predominantly Christians. Traditional idol worship still thrives despite the strong onslaught of Christian principles. "Oghene" means God.

Geography and Climate.
Location.
The Isoko region is located in Delta State of modern Nigeria. 

Local Climatic conditions.
Isoko region is in the tropical rain forest area of the Niger-delta. The region experiences high rainfall and high humidity most of the year. The climate is equatorial and is marked by two distinct seasons. The Dry and Rainy seasons. The Dry season lasts from about November to April and is significantly marked by the cool "harmarttan" dusty haze from the north-east winds. The Rainy season spans May to October with a brief dry spell in August. 






ENDOFARTICLE.
