John Anthony Devine (born November 11 1958 in Dublin) is an Irish former footballer.

Born in Dublin, Devine joined London club Arsenal in November 1974 as an apprentice. Part of a large young Irish contingent at Arsenal (which also included Liam Brady, David O'Leary and Frank Stapleton), Devine turned professional in 1976. A full back who preferred playing on the right, he made his debut for the Gunners on April 28, 1978, deputising for Pat Rice.

With Rice and Sammy Nelson occupying the Arsenal full back positions most of the time, Devine didn't break into the first team straight away, although he did play in the 1980 FA Cup final (which Arsenal lost 1-0 to West Ham United) after Rice was injured. However, Rice returned to the Arsenal side for the Gunners' Cup Winners Cup final against Valencia, which Devine missed. After Rice left for Watford in the summer of 1980, Devine stepped up to become Arsenal's regular right-back, playing 44 times in 1980-81. However, his tenure there didn't last; after Devine was out of the side with injury, John Hollins was moved back into defence as cover, and Devine could not reclaim his place once he had regained fitness. He played only 23 games in his final two seasons at Arsenal.

Devine was capped for the Republic of Ireland at ever level, winning thirty caps in all, with thirteen of those coming for the senior side. He made his senior debut on September 26, 1979 against Czechoslovakia, and his last cap came against Norway on October 17, 1984. He never played in a World Cup or European Championship finals, as Ireland did not qualify for any tournaments during that time, although most of his caps were won in European and World cup Qualifying games.

Devine left Arsenal in the summer of 1983, having played 111 first-team matches for the club in nine years. He joined Norwich City, and played 69 games in two seasons for the Canaries, and was an unused sub in the Canaries' League Cup final win in 1984-85. He then had a stint at Stoke City, but after breaking his leg his career was effectively over. He had brief spells at Norwegian club I.K. Start, before signing for Shamrock Rovers in 1989. He helped Rovers to the FAI Cup final in 1991 before signing for Indian side East Bengals

He then became a coach at Shelbourne. Shelbourne's close ties with Manchester United led to Devine working with the English club, and he has been United's head of youth development in Ireland since 1997.

External links.
Photograph and biography at sporting-heroes.net;
Career information at ex-canaries.co.uk;











ENDOFARTICLE.
