This is a list of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (Philippines) basketball champions, that is winner of the NCAA basketball tournament held every first semester (June to October) of the academic year.

Each season, member schools participate on the basketball tournament. The tournament consists of four rounds. The first two rounds are the elimination rounds, where the top four teams advance to the semi-finals. The two best teams among the Final Four earns a twice to beat advantage, while the other two only needs to be beaten once in order to be eliminated.

The surviving teams from the semi-finals qualify for the best-of-three Finals series, where the first team to notch two wins would be awarded with the championship trophy.

All of the games of the tournament are said to be held on neutral venues, that is outside campuses of the competing schools.




List of champions per year.
The school that wins both the Juniors and Seniors tournament in the same season are "double champions" and are denoted in bold.

Early years (1924-1935).
The NCAA was founded by the Ateneo de Manila, De La Salle College, the Institute of Accounts (known today as Far Eastern University), National University, San Beda College, the University of Manila, the University of the Philippines, Manila and the University of Santo Tomas. Membership was liquid, and the composition of the league changed frequently.


The old-timer six (1936-68).
After National University, University of the Philippines, Manila, and University of Santo Tomas left the league, the Ateneo de Manila, Colegio de San Juan de Letran, De La Salle College, Jos\E9 Rizal College, Map\FAa Institute of Technology and San Beda College continued the league and the league's membership remained unchanged for several decades.

World War II interrupted the league's activities in 1941, but the league resumed operations after the war in 1947.


First expansion (1969-78).
San Sebastian College - Recoletos was admitted in 1969, marking the first change in the league's membership since 1936.


First contraction (1978-84).
The Ateneo de Manila University left the league in 1978 due to the violence that had become rampant in the games.

De La Salle University, on the other hand, left the league in 1981 after a violence-filled 1980 game against Letran.

San Beda College left in 1984 to concentrate on intramural events.


Second expansion (1984-95).
After the Ateneo de Manila, La Salle, and San Beda left, the NCAA opened its doors to new members. In 1984, Perpetual Help College of Rizal was accepted as a new member, while Trinity College of Quezon City became a full member on 1985.

San Beda rejoined the league in 1986, the year Trinity was dropped from the league due to non-compliance of league requirements.


Third expansion (1996-present).
In 1996, Philippine Christian University became the seventh member of the NCAA. Three years later, De La Salle-College of Saint Benilde was admitted as the eighth member. 


Notes.
 The Juniors tournament was suspended from 1961 to 1965 by the NCAA Board of Control when it was revealed when several schools fielded ineligible players.

 Seniors championships awarded on the 1963-64 and 1964-65 seasons were later ruled as unofficial by the NCAA.

 Colegio de San Juan de Letran returned the Juniors trophy after a player was found to be ineligible.

List of championships per school.




Notes.
Teams marked with an asterisk (*) have withdrawn from the NCAA.

 Includes Midgets title.
 Excludes the 2 Seniors championships won on Loose Conference seasons.

Championship streaks.
Note: Streaks which are highlighted are currently ongoing.

See also.
 NCAA Philippines Basketball Championship - main article;
 UAAP Basketball Champions;

References.


Champions list at the official NCAA Philippines website;
Presidents and hosts list at the official NCAA Philippines website;

External links.
 NCAA Philippines official website;
 UBelt.com;





ENDOFARTICLE.
