Pinto is a town in the southeast of Madrid (Spain) ().

Formerly, the belief was that Pinto sat on the geographic middle of the Iberian Peninsula, hence its name comes from the Latin  Punctum, "point".

Limits.
To the North: Getafe.
To the South: Torrej\F3n de Velasco and Valdemoro.
To the East: San Mart\EDn de la Vega.
To the West: Parla and Fuenlabrada.

History.

Religious monuments.
Ermita de San Ant\F3n ("Saint Anthony Abbot hermitage"). Its environment is now transformed by the construction of a mall.
Ermita del Cristo ("Christ hermitage") In its interior is a crucified Christ that it enjoys great popular fervor. ;
Iglesia parroquial de Santo Domingo de Silos ("Parish of Saint Dominique of Silos");

Civilian monuments.
\C9boli tower, wher the princess of Eboli was held. ;
Centro Cultural Infanta Cristina. It was thought until recently that this building, then known as Casa de la Cadena (House of the Chain), provided accommodations for the Catholic Monarchs, but serious historical studies deny such possibility.
Centro Municipal de Cultura ("Local Culture Center");
Francisco Rabal Town Theatre.

Culture.
A Spanish proverbial phrase is estar entre Pinto y Valdemoro, literally "being between Pinto and Valdemoro", meaning "being neither here nor there", "being undecided".

Famous locals.

 Gonzalo de Arteaga, local chronist, writer and archaeologist.
 Carlos Lape\F1a Mor\F3n, writer.
 Pilar Ora\E1, sculptress.
 Diana Abad, gymnast.
 Rosario de Acu\F1a, writer.
 Alberto Contador, Liberty Seguros cyclist.
 Augusto Klappenbach, university professor;

Demography.


Administration.
;


Local holidays.
 Fiesta de San Ant\F3n, January 17;
 Fiestas del Cristo, From June 3 to June 12;
 Asunci\F3n de Mar\EDa|Nta. Sra. de la Asunci\F3n, August 15;
 Domingo de Silos|Santo Domingo de Silos, December 20;

Leisure.
 Juan Carlos I Park.
 Shopping mall Plaza \C9boli.

Nature.
 Regional park of the Southeast.

External links.

Pinto Town Hall;
El Buz\F3n Pinto digital newspaper;
Pinto forum;
Pinto s Partido Popular;
Juntos por Pinto (political institution);
La casa de Pinto (House of Pinto);
CEIP El Prado (Public School El Prado);
Entre Pinto y Valdemoro Guide of events, movies, and other things in Pinto and Valdemoro (In spanish);
CEIP Europa (Public School Europa);
Pinto] at the Instituto Nacional de Estad\EDstica;
Zigzag Digital Digital newspaper of Pinto and outskirts;
Zona Sur Sports newspaper of Pinto;









ENDOFARTICLE.
