;

Puteri Gunung Ledang is a 2004 Malaysian film based on a Malay legend about a princess living on top of Gunung Ledang and a Malaccan sultan's effort to court her. Produced at a cost of USD $4 million, it was the first big-budget Malaysian movie. The movie, starring M. Nasir, Adlin Aman Ramlee, and lead actress, Tiara Jacquelina, was directed by Saw Teong Hin and produced by Shazalli Ramly. 

Plot.


Set in the late 15th century Sultanate of Malacca and the grand Javanese kingdom of Majapahit, against a backdrop of war and mysticism, the movie is about the forbidden romance that blossomed between Gusti Putri, a Javanese Hindu princess, and Hang Tuah, the famed Malay Muslim warrior from Melaka. The historic Melacca was once one of the world's great trading ports, and the most powerful maritime empire in Southeast Asia. History, mythology and fiction are fused to tell a fateful tale of forbidden love, in a time when allegiance and honor to country are foremost to personal desires.

Gusti Putri Retno Dumillah (Tiara Jacquelina), a princess of the Majapahit Kingdom, has fallen profoundly in love with one of Melaka s most commanding and spirited warriors, Hang Tuah (M. Nasir). A vivid dream compels the Princess to commit the unspeakable, and leave her assigned palace life. Without the consent of her king, she sets sail across the open seas, with the unflinching hope that she can be reunited with her one true love.

Soon after the princess  parting, the Majapahit Kingdom is attacked by the powerful Javanese Kingdom of Demak. Desperate to quell the invasion, Gusti Putri's brother and King, Gusti Adipati Handaya Ningrat (Alex Komang), initiates a plan to offer his sister's hand in marriage to the Prince of Demak. Her absence renders this solution impossible. The King's only hope for security is to forge an alliance with the mighty Melaka Sultanate by offering his sister's hand in marriage to Sultan Mahmud Shah of Melaka.

The Sultan accepts. But the Princess is unable to bring herself to do this as she could not bear to be his queen. The Princess instead offers to marry the Prince of Demak. The indignant Sultan will not accept the rejection, nor will he be publicly humiliated. He plots to marry the princess at all cost.

Hang Tuah is ordered to head the royal delegation, and proposes to Gusti Putri on behalf of the Sultan. The warrior devotedly leads the convoy up Gunung Ledang in search of the woman he deeply loves. The Princess attempts to curtail their advance, but eventually yields to Hang Tuah's appeal.

Gusti Adipati was extremely angry that Hang Tuah is getting in his way and invoked supernatural powers to combat him. He instantly appeared by Hang Tuah with wearing ornately designed armor and challenged him to a combat. Despite his supernatural prowess, he is defeated by Hang Tuah and his magical Taming Sari kris. The injured Gusti Adipati expresses that the fate of his country is more important than some love, and Hang Tuah's meddling has destroyed his only hope of saving his people. The guilty Hang Tuah, along with the fact that he can't go against the wishes of his Sultan, resigned as Laksamana and cast his Taming Sari kris into the river, never to be found again.

After a fleeting and tender reunion, the Princess is painfully aware that her beloved's foremost duty is that of a warrior. Despite confessing his love for her, Hang Tuah will not forsake the Sultan's wishes. Brokenhearted, she agrees to marry the Sultan on the proviso that he is able to fulfill seven prohibitive conditions:
 A bridge made of pure gold from Melaka to Gunung Ledang;
 Another bridge made of pure silver from Melaka to Gunung Ledang;
 Seven trays (dulang) of the hearts of mosquitoes;
 Seven jars (tempayan) of the juice of young betel nuts (Note: Young betel nuts do not have juice);
 One jar (tempayan) of tears;
 One bowl of blood from the Sultan himself; and;
 One bowl of blood from his fondest son, Sultan Ahmad.

When the Sultan learns of the Princess' prohibitive conditions, he is even more determined to marry her. But before he could draw blood from his son, the mental projection of Gusti Putri appeared before his eyes. She explained to him that her conditions are nothing more than an indirect refusal of his proposal for marriage. The Sultan, feeling ridiculed planted a curse that starting from next sunlight whomsoever saw the princess will die coughing blood (in Malay folklore sultans carry the power of "tulah", which means that his curse comes true).

Hang Tuah, having heard of the curse of the Sultan from the Bendahara, rushed to Mount Ledang to see her one last time. With only one day remaining he rushes to the top, only to arrive after the sun has risen.

But Hang Tuah is so determined to see her again that he wouldn't care that it would cost him his life. The story ends when Gusti Putri reveals herself to him. It is henceforth unknown what happens to him and her next. And the story of the two continues for generations up until know in a legend known as Puteri Gunung Ledang (Princess of Mount Ledang).

Awards.
Tiara Jacquelina won the "Best Actress" category at the 50th Asia Pacific Film Festival, as well as the "Best Producer" award at the inaugural Asian Festival of First Films in Singapore (2005).

See also.

 Puteri Gunung Ledang (musical);
 Legend of Gunung Ledang;
 Mount Ophir;
 Hikayat Hang Tuah;

External links.
Official website;
;










ENDOFARTICLE.
