

The  Russian Airborne Troops or VDV ( from "Vozdushno-Desantnye Voyska" Russian:         -                 =    ) is an arm of service of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, on a par with the Strategic Rocket Forces and the Space Troops. The Airborne Troops are the most capable mobile assault forces of Russia, as they are airborne forces in the first place.

Soviet Era.
Originally formed in the Soviet Union during the mid 1930s, they were massively expanded during World War II, where they formed up to ten Airborne Corps with numerous Independent Airborne Brigades, with most or all achieving "Guards" status. One of the new units was the 100th Airborne Division. At the end of the war they were reconstituted as Guards Rifle Divisions. They were later rebuilt and eventually formed seven Air Assault Divisions. With an Independent Air Assault regiment and up to sixteen Air Assault Brigades. They were formed into their own VDV command to give the Soviets a Rapid Strike force to spearhead strategic military operations. 


In 1989, the Airborne Forces consisted of:
7th Airborne Division (Kaunas, Lithuanian SSR);
76th Airborne Division (Pskov, RSFSR);
98th Airborne Division (Bolgrad & Kishinev, Moldovan SSR);
103rd Airborne Division (Vitebsk);
104th Guards Airborne Division (Kirovabad, Azerbaijan SSR);
106th Guards Airborne Division (Tula, RSFSR);
242nd Training Centre of the Airborne Forces (Jonava, Lithuanian SSR);
345th Independent Guards Airborne Regiment (Gudauta, Georgian SSR);
11th Air Assault Brigade;
13th Air Assault Brigade;
14th, 21st, 23rd, 35th, 36th, 37th, 38th, 39th, 40th, 56th, 83rd, 95th, 100th Air Assault Brigades;
171st Independent Communications Brigade (Medvezhi Ozera, Moscow Military District, RSFSR);

After the Fall of the Soviet Union.

With the demise of the Soviet Union, the number of VDV divisions has shrunk from seven to four, as well as one brigade:
7th Airborne Division, Novorossiysk;
76th Air Assault Division, Pskov;
98th Airborne Division, Ivanovo;
106th Airborne Division, Tula;
31st Airborne Brigade, Ulyanovsk;

Two other Air Assault Brigades are partially infantry formations reporting directly to the military districts they are stationed in. The VDV's training institute is the Ryazan Institute for the Airborne Troops named for V. Margelov. In the early 1990s, General Pavel Grachev, first Russian Defence Minister planned for the VDV to form the core of the planned Mobile Forces. This was announced in Red Star (Krasnaya Zvezda) in July 1992. However, the Mobile Forces plan never eventuated. The number of formations available for the force was far less than anticipated, since much of the Airborne Forces had been 'nationalised' by the republics their units had been previously based in, and other arms of service, such as the GRU and Military Transport Aviation, who were to provide the airlift component, were adamantly opposed to ceding control of their forces.

Furthermore, 104th Parachute Landing Regiment of 76th Airborne Division is the only Russian land forces regiment, that is fully composed of professional soldiers (and not of "srochniki" - the conscripted soldiers aged eighteen). It should be noted however that an additional major contractorisation of many many units across the Russian armed forces is now under way. It was announced that the 98th Airborne Division is also earmarked for contractorisation.

Unlike western airborne units which must walk when they arrive at their destination, the VDV divisions are mechanized with over 250 armored fighting vehicles, the BMD-3 family of vehicles. VDV units have superior mobility with these vehicles and superior firepower, each division has three regiments equipped with them and their derivatives. The single independent brigade, the 31st at Ulyanovsk, however, is not equipped with its own armor or artillery and may be equivalent to western airborne, in that it functions as light infantry and must walk when reaching their destination. The 31st was the former 104th Guards Airborne Division.



VDV troops participated in the rapid deployment of Russian forces in and around Pristina airport during the Kosovo War, surprising NATO. They also were deployed in Chechnya as an active bridgehead for other forces to follow.

A VDV unit, the 45th ORPSN (Separate Reconnaissance Regiment of Special Designation), that reportedly performed brilliantly in Chechnya during the second campaign, was said to actually represent a Spetznaz GRU unit, which was later proven untrue.  

In 2004, the Russian MoD announced that the VDV will be re-equipped with new APC vehicles of the BMD-4 type (RIA Novosti, December 20th, 2004). However, it is unlikely that this reorganization will happen in the years to come due to lack of funding and resistance from within the VDV. 

Russian airborne troops had their own holiday during the Soviet era, which continues to be celebrated on the 2nd of August. 

Notable former Airborne Forces officers include Aleksandr Lebed, who was involved in responses to disorder in the Caucasus republics in the last years of the Soviet Union, and Pavel Grachev who went on to become the first Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation.

References.
Pavel Baev, The Russian Army in a Time of Troubles, International Peace Research Institute, Oslo, 1996, p.127-135;
Carey Schofield, The Russian Elite: Inside Spetsnaz and the Airborne Forces, Stackpole/Greenhill, 1993;
http://www8.brinkster.com/vad777/sssr-89-91/vdv.htm;
Airborne Assault Troops (VDV) on globalsecurity.org;

RUSSIAN VDV;

External links.
Unofficial website of VDV Russian Only;
Website of "For VDV!" Russian Only;
Association of VDV veterans Russian Only;
History of VDV on pobeda.ru Russian Only;
Soviet Airborne "English site";














ENDOFARTICLE.
