
Scouting in the U.S. Virgin Islands has a long history, from the 1920s to the present day, serving thousands of youth in programs that suit the environment in which they live.

Early history (1920s-1950).
Recent history (1950-1990).
During the late 1960s and early 1970s, Troop 152, sponsored by Saint Patrick's Church, Frederiksted, Saint Croix, formed a steel band of grammar-school-age Scouts that was managed by Vivian Bennerson.  The band toured internationally.  As of 2004, the Greathouse in Estate Diamond, Saint Croix that served as Boy Scout Headquarters for the island was deserted; possibly the destruction of Hurricane Hugo caused its abandonment.  

Scouting in the U.S. Virgin Islands today.

There is only one Boy Scouts of America local council in the United States Virgin Islands, eponymously named the Virgin Islands Council. Originally part of the Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands Council, the political entities were separated administratively in 1960.

The Howard M. Wall Scout Camp at Milord Point Beach on Saint Croix near Great Pond (Saint Croix) on the southeast end of the island is meant to accommodate up to 150 campers. It has a bath house (with two separated banks of showers and two rooms of latrines) and a mess hall. The Boy Scouts use the facility during two brief periods a year. There are plans in place to construct new indoor housing and upgrade at a cost of $500,000.

From time to time there have been discussions on opening the camp facility to Scout groups from other Councils.

Order of the Arrow.
The Arawak Lodge 562, named after a pre-Columbian Caribbean tribe, serves Arrowmen in the United States Virgin Islands.

Girl Scouting in the United States Virgin Islands. 
Girl Scouting in the United States Virgin Islands is administered by the Girl Scout Council of the U. S. Virgin Islands of the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A.

Scouting in the British Virgin Islands.

The Scout Association of the British Virgin Islands operates as a branch of the United Kingdom Scout Association, due to the British Virgin Islands' affiliation as a Crown Colony of the United Kingdom. The BVI Scout Oath and Law, as well as other Scouting requirements, closely follow that of the United Kingdom. 

Although the program activities are taken from the British system, BVI Scouting is geared to the Caribbean way of life. Training for Wood Badge and leader training are conducted with the help of British and nearby Caribbean Scout associations. BVI Scouts participate in numerous Caribbean camps and events.

See also.

The Scout Association of the British Virgin Islands;
 Puerto Rico Council;







ENDOFARTICLE.
