

A stamp act is a law enacted by a government that requires a tax to be paid on the transfer of certain documents such as property deeds. Those that pay the tax receive an official stamp on their documents. The tax raised, called stamp duty, was first devised in the Netherlands in 1624 after a public competition to find a new form of tax. A variety of products have been covered by stamp acts including playing cards, patent medicines, cheques, mortgages, contracts and newspapers. The items often have to be physically stamped at approved government offices following payment of the duty although methods involving annual payment of a fixed sum or purchase of adhesive stamps are more practical and common.

Stamp acts were inforced in many countries including Australia, People's Republic of China, Canada, Ireland, Malaysia, Israel, the United Kingdom and the United States of America.

Stamp acts in Britain and America.
Stamp duties are the oldest taxes still raised by the Inland Revenue. 

 Stamp acts that were an issue while colonizing America 
1689 Stamp Act
Stamp Duty was first introduced in England in 1694 following the Dutch model as An act for granting to Their Majesties several duties on Vellum, Parchment and Paper for 4 years, towards carrying on the war against France.

The duty ranged between 1 penny to shillings on a number of different legal documents including insurance policies, documents used as evidence in courts, grants of honour, grants of probate and letters of administration. It raised around \A350,000 a year and altM
n enjoyed a free press with satirical and seditious publications becoming more and more widely read. As well as raising money the act was an attempt to limit the readership of such publications without invoking explicit censorship.

1724 Stamp Act In 1724 the Act was renewed, although vigorously resisted, its tax on publications was eventually enforced. In 1743 selling unstamped newspapers was made a criminal offence.


1765 Stamp Act This is the main Stamp Act of 1765
In 1765 ,List of Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom Prime Minister George Grenville proposed, and Parliament of the United Kingdom|Parliamentn passed, a Stamp Act to be enacted in the American colonies . It placed a tax on legal documents such as contracts, licenses and wills, and on newspapers, playing cards and dice. Colonial leaders protested that such a tax was "internal," or intended to regulate behavior entirely within the colonies, as opposed to the Navigation Laws taxes on imported good ,which were "external" and therefore acceptable. They protested also that the goal of the tax was explicitly to raise revenue, whereas the Navigation laws were intended to maintain the system of mercantalism by which the Empire managed its economy.

 Post-American Revolution Stamp Acts 

1777 Stamp Act
Introduced by William Pitt the Younger who described Stamp Duty as a tax easily raised, pressing little on any particular class, especially the lower orders of society, and producing a revenue safely and expeditiously collected at small expense. He pointed out that there had been no significant increases in Stamp Duty for some time and so practically doubled the tax. It taxed all paper products.

1808 Stamp Act
Stamp Duty was first imposed on conveyances on sale. Duties in England and Scotland were equalized for the first time.

1815 Stamp Act
Ad valorem duty was extended to more documents. Newspaper stamp duty was increased to sixpence a page making papers unobtainable to all but the rich. That year the tax raised \A33,250,000.
Some publishers such as Richard Carlile defied the law and continued to publish their newspapers without charging the extra tax. Carlile was tried on charges of blasphemy and seditious libel in an attempt to close down his paper, The Republican. He was found guilty, sentenced to three years in Dorchester Jail and fined \A31,500. 

The poet William Wordsworth worked as Distributor of Stamps for Westmorland from this time until his death. Little is known of his official activities, but it seems from a government report that he was in charge of a large area and was prompt in the performance of his duties.

In the 1830s men such as Henry Hetherington, James Watson, John Cleave, George Julian Harney and James O'Brien US Congressman James O'Brien joined Richard Carlile in fighting against what they called a 'tax on knowledge'. The men were often persecuted, being arrested and punished for contravention of the Act. Sales of unstamped newspapers were vastly higher than legal news sources such as The Times.

1855 Stamp Act.
The tax on newspapers was finally abolished following pressure from the publishers' lobbying group, the Newspaper Stamp Abolition Committee led by Henry Hetherington.

1891 Stamp Act and Stamp Duties Management Act.
All the above Acts were superseded by the Stamp Duties Management Act 1891 and the Stamp Act 1891 which still constitute the bulk of UK law on Stamp Duties today.

The modern UK Stamp Act.
In 1914 The Director of Stamping at the Stamp Office oversaw the production of the first Treasury Notes (later called banknotes, not to be confused with US Treasury notes). This lasted until 1928 when production of banknotes passed from the Department to the Bank of England. In 1963 production of postage stamps passed to the Post Office.

The Finance Act 1986 introduced Stamp Duty Reserve Tax. From 27 October 1986 the charge was imposed on 'closing' transactions at the London Stock Exchange which until then had been transactions where no document was used and therefore exempt from Stamp Duty.

A public display of Stamp Office artefacts and records was held at the Courtauld Institute in 1994 to commemorate the Three hundredth anniversary of the introduction of UK Stamp Duty. The Stamp Office was also awarded the Charter Mark by John Major's Advisory Committee as a reward for its public service.
ENDOFARTICLE.
