 
The Perfect Storm is a 2000 film adapted from the book of the same title by Sebastian Junger. The film was directed by Wolfgang Petersen and features George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Diane Lane, Karen Allen and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio.1



 Plot .
In September  1991  the swordfishing boat Andrea Gail  returns to home port in Gloucester, Massachusetts  with a poor catch. Desperate for money the captain convinces his reluctant crew to join him for one more fishing expedition. They head out past their usual fishing grounds, leaving a developing storm behind them. They find great success at the Flemish Cap, but when their ice machine breaks the only way to preserve their catch is to hurry back home. However between the Andrea Gail and Gloucester is a confluence of 2 powerful weather fronts and a hurricane. The crew struggles to sail through pounding waves and shrieking winds, while friends and family worry and wait for a ship that may never come home.2

 Reaction .    	
The families of certain crew members disliked the movie and sued the producers in federal district court in Florida. The district court held that the defendants' First Amendment right to freedom of speech barred the suit. The plaintiffs appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, which could not decide how to interpret the Florida law at issue and certified the question to the Florida Supreme Court. On April 21, 2005, the Florida Supreme Court upheld the district court's interpretation of Florida law and remanded the case to the 11th Circuit, which then affirmed the district court's original decision to dismiss the case.

 See Also .
 129th Rescue Wing;
 Air Force Pararescue;
 1991 Halloween Nor easter;

 References .

1.Berardinelli,James, The Perfect Storm Film Review,reelviews.net, 2000, Retrieved on 2007-1-25  

2. Berardinelli,James, The Perfect Storm Film Review,reelviews.net, 2000, Retrieved on 2007-1-24  



 External links . 
 Plot and background at reelviews.net;
;
;
;














ENDOFARTICLE.
