

The Abominable Snowman is a humanoid cryptid associated with the Himalaya.  The names Yeti or Meh-Teh are commonly used by people indigenous to the Himalaya, and are part of their history and mythology. 

Most mainstream scientists, explorers and writers with experience of the area, consider current evidence of the Yeti's existence to be weak and better explained as hoax, legend, or misidentification of known species. Nevertheless, the Yeti remains one of the most famous creatures of cryptozoology.

 Nomenclature .
The name Yeti is derived from the Tibetan yeh-teh (), a compound of the words yeh () meaning "rocky" or "rocky place" and ti, te or teh () which  translates as "bear", the full name being "rock bear".

Pranavananda goes on further to illustrate the root of the words "ti", "te" and "teh" in that they are derived from the spoken word  'tre'  (spelled "dred"),  Tibetan for bear, with the 'r' softly pronounced as to be almost inaudible, thus making it "te" or "teh".

Other terms, used by the indigenous peoples of the Himalaya, do not all translate exactly the same, but refer to both legend and indigenous wildlife.

 Meh-teh () translates as "man-bear";
 Dzu-teh - 'dzu' translates as "cattle" and the full meaning translates as "cattle bear" and is the Himalayan Red Bear.;
 Migoi or Mi-go () (pronounced mey-goo) translates as "Wild Man" (.;
 Mirka - another name for "wild-man", however as local legend has it "anyone who sees one dies or is killed". The latter is taken from a written statement by Frank Smythe's sherpas in 1937.;
 Kang Admi - "Snow Man";
 Jo-bran - "Man-beast";

Animals that live in the Himalaya, known to Tibetans, Nepalese and mammologists,  that are directly linked with the Yeti phenomena are the Chu-Teh, a Langur monkey  living at lower altitudes, the Tibetan Blue Bear, the Himalayan Brown Bear and the Dzu-Teh which is the Himalayan Red Bear.

The term Yeti is often used to describe a number of very different reported creatures:

 A large ape-like biped (that some suggest could be a Gigantopithecus);
 Human-sized bipedal apes (the Almas and the Chinese wildman);
 Dwarf-like creatures (such as the Orang Pendek).

The term is also often used to refer to reported creatures that fits any of these descriptions: for example, the fear liath may be referred to as the "Scottish Yeti".

Neil Gaiman propsed that the word Yeti literally translated as "That thing over there." As in "Honored Sherpa, what is that thing over there?" "Yeti."

 The Origin of the "Abominable Snowman" .
The appellation "Abominable Snowman" did not come into existence until 1921, in that year Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Howard-Bury lead the Royal Geographical Society's "Everest Reconnaissance Expedition" from which he authored "Mount Everest The Reconnaissance, 1921" in his book he wrote, amongst the details of the expedition, of an account, whilst crossing the "Lhakpa-la" at 21,000 feet  where, he later wrote, he found footprints in the snow.  Howard-Bury stated that these tracks "were probably caused by a large 'loping' grey wolf, which in the soft snow formed double tracks rather like a those of a barefooted man".  However Howard-Bury also stated that "our coolies at once volunteered that the tracks must be that of "The Wild Man of the Snows", to which they gave the name "metoh-kangmi"".  "Metoh" translates as "man bear"  and "Kang-mi" translates as "snowman".

Confusion exists between Howard-Bury's use of "metoh-kangmi", the words his Boatia Sherpa's had used and recited in his book and the account provided in H.W. Tilman's book "Mount Everest, 1938" where Tilman had used the words "metch" (it has been suggested that "metch" does not exist in Tibetan and "kangmi" when relating the details of and the eventual creation of the term "Abominable Snowman". Further weight is added to the notion that "metch" is a misnomer, is provided by Prof. David Snellgrove from London School of Oriental Studies and a recognised authority on the Tibetan language (1956), dismissed the word "metch" stating that it was impossible to conjoin the consonants  "t c h" in Tibetan.". Documentation does seem to suggest that there are very few examples of the term "metch-kangmi",  the term seems to stem from just the one source in 1921.  It has been suggested that "metch" is a misspelling of "metoh".

The involvement of Mr. Henry Newman, who contributed for many years to "The Statesman" in Calcutta using the pen-name "Kim", spoke with the porters of the "Everest Reconnaissance expedition" on return to Darjeeling, and for whatever reason Newman either by artistic license or a mistranslation of "Metoh" as "filthy" or "dirty", which as has been demonstrated it does not mean, created the term "Abominable". Some credence to the suggestion that Newman's artistic predilection played a role is the statement made by H.W. Tilman in his book, that "As he (Newman) wrote long after in a letter to The Times: The whole story seemed such a joyous creation I sent it to one or two newspapers'".

"Whatever effect Mr. Newman intended, from 1921 onwards the Yeti-or whatever various native populations choose to call it- became saddled with the description "Abominable Snowman," an appellation which can only appeal to the music-hall mind than to mammalogists, a fact which has seriously handicapped earnest seekers of the truth", a view supported by and Sanderson

"It cannot be denied however that Mr. Newman put the Yeti "on the map".  During the twenties and thirties sightings of both of prints and of the animal itself occurred right across the Himalaya from the Burmese frontier to the Karakoram, not all of them by credulous witnesses.".

 The 1954 Pangboche Scalp Investigation .




The  Daily Mail "Snowman Expedition" of 1954, on March 19 printed an article, where the expedition teams obtained and submitted specimens of hairs from the scalp in Pangboche monastery. The research on the hair was conducted by Professor Frederic Wood Jones, F.R.S, D.Sc., (who died on September 29 1954) and an expert in human and comparative anatomy.

The research consisted of taking micro-photographs of the hairs and comparing them with hairs from known animals such as the bear and orangutan.

He (Professor Woods-Jones) was of the opinion that the evidence of the hairs and the photographs, from the Pangboche monastery "scalp", proved it was not a scalp of any type.  The reason for this is that although some animals have a ridge of hair beginning at the top of the head and extending between the shoulders to the back, he did not believe that any animals have a ridge such as shown in the photographs of the Pangboche relic running from the base of the forehead across the top of the head and ending at the back of the neck"

The hairs were black or dark brown in colour in dull light, and a "foxy-red" in sunlight. None of these had been dyed and they were probably exceedingly old.

The hairs were bleached, cut into sections and compared microscopically with those of known animals. Wood-Jones was unable to suggest from what animal the Pangboche hairs were taken.  He was, however convinced they are not the hairs of an anthropoid ape, nor of a bear.  He suggests they may come from the hair of a coarse-haired hoofed animal, but not from its head; they may be from its shoulder.

 Events .
 19th century .
In 1832, the Journal of the Asiatic society of Bengal published the account of B. H. Hodgson, who wrote that while trekking in northern Nepal, his native guides spotted a tall, bipedal creature covered with long dark hair, then fled in fear. Hodgson did not see the creature, but concluded it was an orangutan.

An early record of reported footprints appeared in 1889 in L.A. Waddell's Among the Himalayas He reported his native guides described a large apelike creature that left the prints, but concluded the prints were made by a bear. Waddell heard stories of bipedal, apelike creatures, but wrote that of the many witnesses he questioned, none "could ever give me an authentic case. On the most superficial investigation it always resolved into something that somebody had heard of." 

 Early 20th century .
The frequency of reports increased in the early 20th century, when Westerners began making determined attempts to climb the many mountains in the area and sometimes reported seeing odd creatures or strange tracks.

In 1925, N.A. Tombazi, a photographer  and member of the Royal Geographical Society, saw a creature at about 15,000 ft  near Zemu Glacier. Tombazi later wrote that he observed the creature from about 200 or 300 yards, for about one minute. "Unquestionably, the figure in outline was exactly like a human being, walking upright and stopping occasionally to pull at some dwarf rhododendron bushes. It showed up dark against the snow, and as far as I could make out, wore no clothes."  About two hours later, Tombazi and his companions descended the mountain, and saw what they took to be the creature's prints, described as "similar in shape to those of a man, but only six to seven inches long by four inches wide....  The prints were undoubtedly those of a biped."

 Late 20th century .
Western interest in the Yeti peaked dramatically in the 1950s. While attempting to scale Mount Everest in 1951, Eric Shipton took photographs of a number of large prints in the snow, at about 6,000 m (19,685 ft) above sea level. These photos have been subject to intense study and debate. Some argue they are the best evidence of Yeti's reality, but others contend the prints are from a mundane creature and have been distorted and enlarged by the melting snow.

In 1953, Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay reported seeing large footprints while scaling Mount Everest. Hillary would later discount Yeti reports as unreliable.

During the Daily Mail Snowman Expedition of 1954, the largest search of its kind, the mountaineering leader John Angelo Jackson, made the first trek from Everest to Kangchenjunga and in the process photographed symbolic paintings of the Yeti at Thyangboche Gompa. Jackson tracked and also photographed many footprints in the snow, many of which were identifiable. However, there were many large footprints which could not be identified. The flattened footprint-like indentations were attributed to erosion and subsequent widening of the original footprint by wind and particle action.

Beginning in 1957, Tom Slick, an American who had made a fortune in oil, funded a few missions to investigate Yeti reports. In 1959, feces reportedly from a Yeti were collected by Slick's expedition. Analysis found a parasite but could not classify it. Bernard Heuvelmans wrote that "Since each animal has its own parasites, this indicated that the host animal is equally an unknown animal." 

In 1959, actor Jimmy Stewart, while visiting India, reportedly smuggled the remains of a supposed Yeti, the so-called Pangboche Hand, by hiding them in his luggage when he flew from India to London.

In 1960, Sir Edmund Hillary mounted an expedition to collect and evaluate evidence for the Yeti and sent a Yeti scalp from the Khumjung monastery to the West for testing. The results indicated that the scalp had been manufactured from the skin of the serow, a goat-like Himalayan antelope. But some disagreed with this analysis. Shackley said they "pointed out that hairs from the scalp look distinctly monkey-like, and that it contains parasitic mites of a species different from that recovered from the serow."

In 1970, British mountaineer Don Whillans says he saw a creature while scaling Annapurna. While scouting for a campsite, Whillans heard some odd cries. His Sherpa guide told him the sound was a Yeti's call. That night, reported Whillans, he saw a dark shape moving near his camp. The next day, Whillans observed a few human like footprints in the snow, and that evening, he asserted that with binoculars, he watched a bipedal, ape-like creature for about 20 minutes as it apparently searched for food not far from his camp. 

 Analysis .
The anthropologist John Napier (primatologist) in his book "Bigfoot: The Yeti and Sasquatch in Myth and Reality", a detailed collation of writings, first hand reports and analysis on the subject, argued that amongst what evidence there is for the Yeti, "unlike the Sasquatch, there is little uniformity of pattern, and what uniformity there is incriminates the bear".

In 2003, Japanese mountaineer Makoto Nebuka published the results of his 12-year linguistic study and postulated that the word "Yeti" is actually a corruption of the word "meti" - a regional dialect term for "bear". The ethnic Tibetans fear and worship the bear (as in many traditional cultures) as a supernatural being. Nebuka's claims were subject to almost immediate criticism, however, and Nebuka was accused of linguistic carelessness. Dr Raj Kumar Pandey, for example, who has also researched both Yetis and mountain languages, said "it is not enough to blame tales of the mysterious beast of the Himalayas on words that rhyme but mean different things."

Many cryptozoologists,  after examining eye-witness reports and statistical evidence, have concluded that Yeti reports are misidentification of mundane creatures. Well-financed expeditions have turned up little positive evidence of its existence, although one expedition to Bhutan did retrieve a hair sample that, after DNA analysis, could not be matched to any known animal.

In 1997, Italian mountaineer Reinhold Messner claimed to have come face to face with a Yeti. He has since written a book, My Quest for the Yeti, and also claims to have actually killed one. According to Messner, the Yeti is actually the endangered Himalayan Brown Bear, Ursus arctos isabellinus, that can walk upright or on all fours.

Enthusiasts speculate that these reported creatures could be present-day specimens of the extinct giant ape Gigantopithecus, as the only evidence (other than teeth) recovered from Gigantopithecus (its jawbone) indicates a skull rested upon a vertical spinal column (as in hominines and other bipedal apes such as Oreopithecus). However, while the Yeti is usually described as bipedal, most scientists feel that Gigantopithicus was probably  quadrupedal, and so massive that unless it evolved specifically as a bipedal ape (like Oreopithecus and the hominids) upright walking would have been even more difficult for the now extinct primate than it is for its extant quadrupedal relative, the orangutan.

 The Yeti in popular culture .


The Yeti has become a cultural icon, appearing in movies, books and video games. Mainly this is in the abominable snowman style, but occasionally as comic relief. In 2006, Disney opened a ride called "Expedition Everest" in Animal Kingdom in Walt Disney World. Inside the waiting area lays a Yeti museum, complete with Yeti-wrecked items and cement encased footprints.

 Citations .


 References .
 John Napier (primatologist) (MRCS, IRCS, DSC) "Bigfoot: The Yeti and Sasquatch in Myth and Reality" 1972  ISBN 0-525-06658-6.
 Sir Francis Younghusband The Epic of Mount Everest by 1926, Edward Arnold & Co. The expedition that inadvertently coined the term "Abominable Sbowman";
 Charles Howard-Bury, "Mount Everest The Reconnaissance", 1921, Edward Arnold, ISBN 1-135-39935-2.
 H.W. Tilman, "Mount Everest 1938", Appendix B, pp. 127-137,  Pilgrim Publishing. ISBN 81-7769-175-9.
 John A. Jackson, More than Mountains, Chapter 10 (pp 92) & 11, "Prelude to the Snowman Expedition & The Snowman Expedition", George Harrap & Co, 1954;
 Ralph Izzard, The Abominable Snowman Adventure, this is the detailed account by the Daily Mail correspondent on the 1954 expedition to find the "Snowman", Hodder and Staoughton, 1955.
 Charles Stonor, The Sherpa and the Snowman, recounts the 1955 Dail Mail "Abominable Snowman Expedition" by the scientific officer of the expedition, this is a very detailed analysis of not just the "Snowman" but the flora and fauna of the Himalaya and its people. Hollis and Carter, 1955.
 John A. Jackson, Adventure Travels in the Himalaya Chapter 17, "Everest and the Elusive Snowman", 1954 updated material, Indus Publishing Company, 2005, ISBN 81-7387-175-2.
 Jerome Clark, Unexplained! 347 Strange Sightings, Incredible Occurrences, and Puzzling Physical Phenomena, Visible Ink Press, 1993.
 Bernard Heuvelmans, On the Track of Unknown Animals, Hill and Wang, 1958;
 Reinhold Messner, My Quest for the Yeti: Confronting the Himalayas' Deepest Mystery, New York: St. Martin's Press, 2000, ISBN 0-312-20394-2;
 Gardner Soule, Trail of the Abominable Snowman, New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1966, ISBN 0-399-60642-4.

 See also .
 Yeren;
 Yowie;

 External links .

 Yeh-teh "that thing out there";
 The Unmuseum's Yeti page;
 Yeti, The Abominable Snowman - from Occultopedia;
 A theory of Yeti (This site is in French);
 The Cryptid Zoo: Yetis;
 Migo;
























ENDOFARTICLE.
